#Moving files, using notebooks & getting started with QIIME!

Authored by Lizzy Wilbanks for Swarthmore College BIOL133, Spring 2017


## Today's tutorial will introduce you to a few important topics, including HOW TO:
- Transfer files between your AWS EC2 instance and your laptop using `scp`
- Download publicly-hosted data to an EC2 instance using `wget`  
- Explain how to launch an EC2 instance based on a community amazon machine image (AMI)
- Use Jupyter notebooks to follow tutorials or take kickass computational notes
- Start using QIIME, the major software pipeline for analyzing high throughput 16S rRNA gene sequence data

###0.  What is QIIME and why are we using it?
QIIME™ (pronounced chime) stands for Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology.
http://qiime.org/

QIIME is an open-source bioinformatics pipeline for performing microbiome analysis from raw DNA sequencing data. QIIME is designed to take users from raw sequencing data generated on the Illumina or other platforms through publication quality graphics and statistics. This includes demultiplexing and quality filtering, OTU picking, taxonomic assignment, and phylogenetic reconstruction, and diversity analyses and visualizations. QIIME has been applied to studies based on billions of sequences from tens of thousands of samples.


###1. Launching a community AMI
This section of the tutorial will exaplin how you can launch an EC2 instance that's got all the software we need preinstalled.

[Navigate to the tutorial](https://github.com/ewilbanks/micdiv2017/blob/master/tutorials/2017-02-16-launch-community-ami.md)

###2. Transfering data tutorial
This section of the tutorial will:
- walk you through launching your EC2 instance
- go over `ssh` login to your EC2 instance
- introduce how to transfer files to your EC2 instance using `scp` and `wget` 

[Navigate to the tutorial](https://github.com/ewilbanks/micdiv2017/blob/master/tutorials/2017-02-16-transferring-files.md)


###3. Jupyter notebook tutorial
This section of the tutorial will:
- help you get download the data for the QIIME tutorials
- explain a bit about how Jupyter notebooks work

[Navigate to the tutorial](https://github.com/ewilbanks/micdiv2017/blob/master/tutorials/2017-02-16-jupyterNotebooks.md)

###4. QIIME tutorial
This section of the tutorial will help you launch the QIIME ipython notebook tutorial.

[Navigate to the tutorial](https://github.com/ewilbanks/micdiv2017/blob/master/tutorials/2017-02-15-qiime-tutorial.md)


### When you're done working
You can either `STOP` or `TERMINATE` your instance from the EC2 console.  

Which should you choose?

#### `STOP` the instance if you want to come back and work with it using data that's in the home directory
- stopped instances save the data on the home directory (unlike terminate)
- we only pay a very small (pennies) storage fee, as opposed to the hourly rate for running the instance
- you can start up the instance again and work right from where you were
*Note that each time you start an instance you pay for 1 hour of time (~10-20 cents) even if you don't use the full hour.*

#### Terminate the instance if you don't care about saving any of the data
- Terminated instances vanish, no run fees and no storage fees
- All data associated with this instance will be **gone**
